# analysis-project
A major concern connected to climate change is sea level rise.  According to an article from National Geographic, average sea levels have gone up by about 23 centimetres since 1880,  and the current trend is a yearly increase of approximately 3.2 mm (Nunez, 2019).  A 2019 report from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA) noted that the last twenty years have seen a rapid increase in flooding events along U.S. coasts alone, and that  increase  is  expected  to  continue  (Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  2020).   This  is  problematic  because  rising  sea levels could lead to coastal areas being flooded, forcing people to flee for higher ground and migrate to new areas.  Storms and hurricanes would also be exacerbated, worsening the damage they cause.  Additionally, saltwater could leach into aquifers, destroying habitats and leading to huge losses in crop production as freshwater is contaminated (Amadeo,2020).We are interested in factors that affect sea level rise, such as glacier melt, ice sheet mass loss, and temperatures rising all over the world (Hennig, 2019).  When water heats up, it expands, which causes the oceans to take up more space.  While it is natural for glaciers and sea ice melt during the warmer months, they are now melting more than they should each year, and that also adds to sea levels—the natural evaporation and reformation of snow and ice that would normally balance out these effects is less effective as global temperatures increase (Nunez, 2019).We are interested, additionally, in the relationship between carbon dioxide (CO2) in the air and sea level rise and whether the two follow similar increasing trends.  Due to the fossil fuels we frequently burn for energy, CO2levels in the atmosphere are greater than they have ever been in at least the past 800,000 years.  As a greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide contributes greatly to trapping heat on Earth, causing global temperatures to rise, which in turn connects greater amounts of CO2to rising sea levels (Lindsey, 2020).Our research question is, “How are global mean sea levels changing with respect to changes in atmospheric CO2concentrations, mean cumulative mass balance of glaciers and global mean temperatures?” 

Datasets:

•Average cumulative mass balance of reference glaciers worldwide: https://datahub.io/core/glacier-mass-balance#data
•Monthly CO2 (this data was also processed and put into an Excel file):  https://www.CO2.earth/monthly-CO2
•Observed land-ocean temperatures: https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2015-whats-warming-the-world/data/observed.csv
•Global  Average  Absolute  Sea  Level  Change,  1880-2015:   https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-08/sea-levelfig-1.csvThe first dataset we used is called “Average cumulative mass balance of reference Glaciers worldwide”.  

Computational Overview:

We used different statistical calculations to analyze our data.  We created a function for each one.  There were some built-in functions we could have used from the statistics module, but we preferred to implement them ourselves. These functions include mode and median.  We did have to use some built-in functions from the math module, these include:  ceil and sqrt.  Functions include:  sample standard deviations, which calculates and returns the variability of the data.  We also calculate r which measures the strength and direction between two quantitative variables.  This is implemented using the correlation function.  Other functions were implemented to figure out the linear regression: functions to return the slope and y-intercept of the line of best fit.  We also implemented an interpolation to return the  y  values  at  certain  x  values  in  our  line  of  best  fit.   We  implemented  an  extrapolation  function  in  order  to predict future values of the graph.  We also calculated the coefficient of determination (r squared) and the root mean squared error, which measures the prediction error for predictions from a linear regression model.  Lastly, we created a  function  (multiple linear regression)  that  performs  multiple  linear  regression  on  the  data  using  the  scikit-learn  (sklearn) library.  Using sklearn’s Linear Regression model, we can perform multiple linear regression, getting the coefficients and y-intercept of the equation from Linear Regression.coef, and LinearRegression.intercept.  LinearRegression.fit() was used to ‘train’ the data to produce a final model. 

Each  file  was  in  a  csv  file  or  an  excel  file.   Pandas  was  imported  as  pd  and  the  functions  read_csv_file  and read_excel_file were used to read csv files and excel files respectively.  Both of these functions returned data frames which  are  objects  associated  with  pandas.   These  objects  are  useful  for  storing  tabular  data.   Each  dataset  was processed, and they were processed in different ways.  The CO2 data was processed so that the averages for each year were inputted into the list of x-values.  The sea level data was processed so that the data from the 5th column was inputted into the list of y-values.  The glacier data and temperature data were processed so that the data from the 2nd column was inputted into the list of x-values. The filenames_to_lists  function  converts  each  file  from  their  respective  format  to  lists.   The  create_data_frame function uses pandas to generate data frames from the data that can then be used to plot the dependent variable against the independent variable.  In order to plot them, from matplotlib, plotly was imported as plt and it was used to output the titles on the graphs and to plot the points. For curve fitting, linear, quadratic, cubic, and exponential functions were used as model functions to create curves of best fit using the curve_fit function from scipy.optimize. The curve_fit function took the model function, the list of x-values, and the list of y-values and outputted the optimal parameters for the function and the covariance of the x- and y-values.  For curve-fitting, the covariance was not used.  So, for a linear equation, the optimal parameters outputted  from  the  curve_fit  function  will  be  floats  for  m  and  b.   For-loops  were  then  used  to  generate  y-values according to the x-values and the optimal parameters.  Matplotlib.plotly was used to generate a scatter plot and a curve of best fit on the same graph.  The scatter plot consisted of the actual y-values against the x-values, and the line graph consisted of the calculated y-values against the x-values.  The curve equations were generated as strings from the optimal parameters outputted from the curve_fit function.

Our program uses Matplotlib to display results in a visual way,  because it has “widgets” that allow a user to interact with graphs created by the program.  When the run_program function is called, it displays several buttons in a new window.  These Button objects from Matplotlib.widgets can be clicked on to bring up various graphs where sea levels are plotted along the y-axis and one of the three independent variables (CO2 levels in the atmosphere, glacier mass balance, or global overall temperatures) is plotted along the x-axis.  These are graphed using plt.plot().  The graphs display curve fits generated using functions described above for the curve fitting module and displays their equations  with  functions  from  the  curve equations  module.   Additionally,  there  is  a  ‘General  Statistical  Analysis’ button that will display, in a separate window, the results of performing multiple linear regression, showing the final equation, as well as the coefficients and intercept.  Furthermore, this window will show root mean squared error for each independent variable.
